I think there's been a big trend
in expeditions that are geared
towards science that's also
geared towards conservation
I can rationalize you know why I
take risks for scientific
reasons for conservation reasons
but I would be lying to you it's
just amazing to get into these
places I'd ready to get after
some of these trips what why do
you keep going on these sorts of
expeditions why you keep going
on them and it's cliche but this
is why we going then we go to
these amazing places from
aesthetic and cultural
standpoint and I got to go all
around the world i used to work
as in commercial diving so i was
sent to remote areas what sort
of my specialty
it's just you realize that we're
living in a different kind of
world and you're just drawn into
them and then all of a sudden
you're jerked out of that world
and you end up you know like
this
and the irony of this this
particular accident which is I
had been diving all day and one
of the deepest known caves in
the world 663 feet deep and
we're doing with what
objectively is pretty risky
diving and after three days of
working in this hole in the
Bahamas
I climbed up on the roof of a
three-story building and take a
picture of a rare tree that was
blooming and I fell off the roof
so you know our objective vs
subjective risk assessment is
not you know not so great in the
beginning I was motivated by
adventure I wasn't motivated by
these more rational excuses and
I was never kind of analytically
motivated as a child you can see
I think that's my high school
report card
yeah so my analytical skills
were somewhat a
under underdeveloped to put it
in my sleep
do you think that's for kids in
the audience
hey come talk to me after but I
was motivated by other things
and actually that's that's the
real cover from 2015 issue that
i just found out before the show
that was one of the top selling
off the shelf covers my only
explanation is that I think the
stoners must've kept buying it
over
oh I didn't remember that they
bought it
well anyway but i was i was very
much motivated by the ocean and
surfing and I i actually tried
to get into the Navy and the
Coast Guard and I kept doing the
psychological tests and it's it
unfit for vertical chain of
command
it's like kind of stuck in my
head but I didn't up going to
school in California on and off
it and UC Santa Barbara mostly
motivated by the surfing but I
was really into the ocean in
anything to do with adventure I
end up getting jobs in the film
industry doing stunts in
coordinating stunts and and that
you know I found out wow you can
make a living off of adventure
but it was once i started
getting into the diving
that's what opened up really the
world of science to me
you go into this in significant
tiny little muddy hole and you
realize beneath my feet is this
whole other world that's
unexplored and kind of my
realization of this in the
increase in some of my diving
skills coincide with me with
meeting West Skiles and he
really guided me as as a mentor
as a friend when I was 19 years
old
into what the the world of
professional diving was like and
he was the photographer on our
expedition to the blue holes of
the Bahamas that was a cover
story in august of 2010 and
that's the shot you can see
there's four divers and that
picture actually and west in
this tragic irony he died just a
few days before the magazine
with his cover shot came out
and it was devastating to all of
us but it's to me being up here
is very much she'll also telling
my friend stories and it's not
just Wes who passed away in
expedition related activities it
hits close to home as well this
was from one of my I have a
little boys names Lincoln and
this was in kindergarten that is
not his handwriting
it's like a free association i
guess so when he came up with
sad
it kind of rubs your nose in it
you know it hits home and it's
just this battle in my own brain
of what's worth it what's not
and everyone so I'll just gets
too much and then at some point
you know 20 years ago I went
back to school because I felt
like okay I need something more
substantial career i'm very
interested in the sciences mix
of ecology along with on with
human behavior and that's how I
ended up in environmental
anthropology and i was i was
only in school for less than two
semesters when I get this letter
in the mail from some of you may
know dr. bill stone who's an
explorer and an innovator
inviting me to join the United
States deep caving team and this
is where we went
so in southern Mexico in Oaxaca
in the what's called the
wildlife plateau and we all
drove there independently and
we're set to meet a certain date
was pre gps so actually that's
the map that we were given and
saying where to go
you know don't be late bring
your money but you know we're
driving through the lowland
jungle and you come around the
corner and this is what you see
this massively this uplifted
limestone plateau in the cave
entrance we're going to work on
was at the top of this plateau
and that's the view from the
cave entrance in the mouth of
the cave is quite small but it
creates a giant microclimate
because of different
temperatures and pressures
this is the entrance so you drop
down I think you can see the
person and so here's the the
cave system so you have the
jungle drop i just mentioned you
start doing day trips where
you're dropping all the
equipment
you're dragging everything by
rope it's a very vertical cave
and when you have enough
equipment at the depot you stop
taking day trips and you start
living underground so camp 3 was
our main base camp camp fives
where we would start
the diving but you can only send
two people at a time to camp
five because the area is really
small and you're hanging over
the water
so most of the activity was a
camp three and you're going down
and down and you know some of
these drops are a few hundred
meters
really you're confined to the
dark and you're stuck with
people some of whom you really
love in some of whom
well you know and then from
there you really keep going down
and keep going down and you go
through these canyons that are
just amazing of crystal clear
water you get - roaring
waterfalls and you can't even
hear yourself think
and in fact camp five was at one
of these roaring waterfalls and
so we used to wear balaclavas
and earplugs and i ended up down
at Camp five with my very good
friend in rowland and he he and
i were kind of the team
pranksters
sorry and I really teamed up and
we were the two youngest and we
really got along very well
so when we were down there was
our turn we were lower on the
totem pole to to get a chance to
dive in the other team
the other team members haven't
had luck at cracking the some
cracking this underwater
passageways full of some tight
restrictions and you can't see
more than about really about
what some in front of your hand
and so I got to die first
and I went on this is this gives
you a good sense and machine
it's too redundant rebreathers
that you're wearing on your back
there's about ten valves that
you're constantly changing
there's two computers that
you're constantly monitoring and
changing so it was a complex
very experimental system at the
time and then you're also doing
all the cave diving which is
running a constant guideline
tons of other caving related
equipment
so in and I were down there and
it was really the probably that
time was the most fun I've ever
had in my life everything was
going like clockwork we've been
working together for two or
three months we traded jokes we
didn't even have to finish each
others sentences I mean we were
quite close
and I made it pretty far on the
first time I got through what
had been apparently stopping
people and made it far came back
excited we fix up the rebreather
because we were sharing one
rebreather and then he and took
off and he made it a little bit
further and he said I i think it
might be sloping up and then
came back and then I went and I
actually made it all the way
through the something came up
into a big air bell with a big
giant sand bar and I literally
felt like I was on another
planet had this otherworldly
feelings otherworldly silence
and I was so excited and ian was
a better dry caper than me so I
want to get back it was you know
a little less than a half a mile
swim back so i made it back to
camp five and i think this is it
we did it and even took off on
the next dive and he took off I
remember he had his helmet he
had his kids teddy bear taped
onto his helmet I rapped on to
his helmet and you know we had
it said if he's not back in six
hours
you know the literally the words
were called the cavalry and two
hours go by was expecting in
about three or four hours five
hours six hours and no end so I
you know I left the pot of hot
pot of tea a light of pulley
system so you could get yourself
out of the water and I headed
back a few hours up to camp 3 i
got there about one in the
morning and woke everyone up and
said we have to go on a rescue
and it was probably one of the
most experience with this
machine and but he also was a
diabetic so there was a question
in my mind was having some kind
of diabetic incident and I got
into quite a fight with a team
but to make a very very long
horrific story short I ended up
going back down making the dive
and found Ian's on the other
side of the sandbar back in the
water where he had started
diving again with a cave diving
real with a line in his hand and
I found him at the bottom with
just the real right out of his
hand
very peacefully so it was you
know all of a sudden to go from
the highest high to the lowest
low you can imagine in about the
lowest point you can ever
imagine
literally was was devastating
and you have to block that out
of your mind and i made the my
way back to camp five where Bill
was waiting for me and it took
six days to get in and back out
to the surface and ends up i was
ended up being underground for
21 days and that's what it looks
like after 21 days underground
but when we came out and we came
out with the ends body the mazda
tech village and I'll never
forget this and i'm still
forever grateful
they had carved out steps in the
cornfields and the whole village
came in accompanied us out and
we went right into the the local
small Cathedral where we
it was a really a combination of
an indigenous religion along
with Catholicism and had an
extremely moving ceremony right
there and there it was
I don't want to tell you that
was get the idea but for me I
was I don't even know I hadn't
slept for days and days and
ended up the National Geographic
film team with my friend Wes had
just gotten down there a couple
days before and somehow we
decided to go back into the K
for a few days and just kind of
try to get a grip on things we
got caught in a flash flood and
end up getting trapped for four
days ripped all of our ringing
out
we have having to ration food
and lighting stuff by the way if
you ever are short on things and
after rash and don't tell anyone
your rationing it just it's like
creates instant hoarders
but we know what we got out of
there and at the end of that I
was really I was done and I left
the expedition and Bill was very
gracious and in that in fact
most of the expedition was gone
but bill and Barbara him and was
one of the leaders on the
expedition
she and Bill decided to go on
and they did what was in my
opinion one of the most
audacious exploration feet so he
and i had stopped at that
deepest point they went by
themselves
all the way to that for this
point which at the time was the
deepest point known and there
was no chance of anyone ever
rescuing them that's them at the
the deepest point right there
and this was in the nineteen
ninety-five issue of national
geographic and here's a picture
of my friend again
and you know I kept in touch
with his family over the years
and his wife remarried someone
from the same mountain rescue
team but this is that his
two-year-old Connor now who's
become a British cave or a very
well-known British paver and we
hadn't met for he's now 24 years
old and he came to Florida two
weeks ago
so we spent 10 days together
traveling around Florida diving
together so I mean it's hard it
is for me to tell this story
it's kind of in a strange way
it's come full circle and it was
we had a really great great time
together
we're heading down to explore an
underwater cave and then all of
a sudden it just started raining
down on harmony
my initial reaction was to just
going to scream in my
head